We started working really off the coast of
Southern California. And in 1940, we did make a
cruise as far north as roughly the Columbia River.
And another venture that was in 1939 was a cruise to
the Gulf of California, which we made in the winter
of that year, which was the first time that any
vessel from Scripps had really ventured very far
away from home, and this was really sort of
exploring in those days because so little was
known.
And I don't know what might have happened if the war
had not intervened, and I think that we would have
had to find some larger vessel and that we would
have, presumably within a few years at least, have
moved out to operations on sort of an ocean-wide
scale.
Actually, I left Scripps in July of 1941, having
spent a month prior to that at Woods Hole to learn
something about the interpretation of bathy
thermograph observations in terms of underwater
sound problems. And on July the 1st, I moved down
the Navy laboratory on Point Loma, which not as an
employee of the Navy, but under one of these war
research programs that
later on by the NDRC, the National Defense
Research Committee, I think it was called. And
this was a essentially federally funded war
research program administered through the
University of California. And I stayed in this
program at Point Loma until early in 1946.
By that time, the work had been taken over by the
Navy itself, but I still continued, as did many of
the others there, to be actually as employed by the
University of California. And during the first
year or so down there, the work was primarily that I
was engaged primarily how you might interpret
various physical conditions in the ocean,
primarily temperature and salinity and so on, in
terms of the acoustic conditions in the ocean. We
used to call it the echo-ranging problem, and this
gradually gave way to some other environmentally
related problems, but I became more and more
involved in the general sort of administration of
some of the basic research going on at the
laboratory on Point Loma. And toward the end, I
actually was an assistant director in charge of
the research, which involved primarily set of
acoustics of various kinds, but a good many other
types of activities. Now, I have several
questions on that. Now, you go to Woods Hole,
though, to work with the BT for anti-submarine
warfare, don't you? I did go back and work with
Robert Montgomery for about a month, because at
that time, as I indicated earlier, we really
didn't know what the bathy thermograph was
measuring and so on, and also how you might be able
to use this kind of information in these
underwater sound problems.
naive as to what we were doing. But I contributed my
small part here to the whole program in that I was
the one who suggested they make photographic
copies. And Montgomery and I worked out the first
sort of system for coding these things and keeping
the appropriate records and so on, which
persisted for a good many years after that. Right.
You're looking for ways of measuring thermal
clamps. In effect, yes. There had been some work
done by Columbus Islin that was told by Morris
Ewing and some of the other people that were
associated with them in the preceding few years.
which showed the probable relationship of
temperature and humidity conditions on
underwater sound. And Morris Ewing's
contribution, I think, was particularly to show
that you could use some of the refraction
computations that he was familiar with from his
work in geophysics would be applied these
conditions in the ocean, and of course it was not
directly temperature and salinity that was
involved here, but rather the distribution of
sound velocity. And so there were, we had the clue
as to what we should be doing, although a lot of the
sort of techniques had not been worked out, and
particularly during the first year or so, much
effort went into devising ways of calculating
these so-called ray diagrams and seeing how you
could, in a sense, simplify some of the conditions
as you observed in the ocean to compute these sort
of ray diagrams and so
on. Then a lot of effort was spent in the first year
or two of making up what were called sound ranging
charts, or sonar charts, which didn't depend just
on the BT. We used every other scrap of information
we could to essentially try and come up with some
semi quantitative approach of the regional
differences in sound ranging conditions that
might be predicted from known characteristics of
the ocean waters. Why photography? I'm sorry? Why
photography? What made you think of photography?
Oh, I guess because my father was a photographer
and it seemed to me that the BT slide was like a
negative. Why not put it in a in a projector and just
make a print from this, which could then be
enlarged, too, because the original BT slide you
really had to insert in a magnifier in order to read
it. We more or less standardized on what was
roughly a postcard-sized reproduction. Now, all
you have to do is stick them in a regular
photographic enlarging machine and fairly
contrasty paper.
Now then, when you're working, I need to know
something else here, too, right now. Why didn't
you go with Revell to the Navy and to Washington at
this time? Why did you choose Point Loma? Well,
here again, there's some kind of interesting
things that, if I remember correctly, about 1939,
there was some concern about the international
situation and so on. Revelle had applied for and
obtained a reserve commission as an ensign, and I
applied too. I think it was somewhat later than
that because, yes, must have been. And I have
somewhere in my files a letter that I received from
the Navy saying that they regretted they couldn't
offer me a commission because they had no
foreseeable need for oceanographers. So, of
course, Ravel went down to Point Loma at that same
time, and I can't really remember how long he was
there, but he was there for about a year or two
before he went back to Washington.
I had tried that route, but it didn't work. And
I think that answers it, sure. And then during
those war years, then, you were involved in
research at Point Loma itself. Yes. I would, as I
look back on it now, I did a good deal of of research,
particularly in the first year or two. But really
what I became more and more involved in was what I
would consider a science administration. And
things moved very rapidly in those days. And so
there was a great deal of sort of planning and a good
deal of traveling involved in that under the NDRC
where there were several centers where work of
this kind was going on, and they served as a sort of
coordinating function. And so we met at what
seemed like fairly frequent intervals for
discussions of what we were doing, what we were
finding, what we ought to do, and also in trying to
prepare sort of manuals and documents of various
kinds for the Navy. So this is part of what I
consider is the administrative side. I wasn't
involved too much with actual sort of budgeting or
matters of that kind, but it didn't. What it didn't
involve was us breaking out from the rather narrow
kind of confines of individual research and
getting involved with the programs and
activities of a variety, probably a large number
of people in fields that I had absolutely no
familiarity with at all. And this, I think, was one
of the effects of the war that it that those of us who
were involved in activities of this kind really
got broken away from what would have been a normal
sort of pattern of
career evolution here and got thrust into very
large, very complex kind of problems involving
fields which were And they were originally at
least unfamiliar to us. I anticipate, to clarify
my next question, with whom did you come into
contact in about 1941 to 1943 to sort of move you
into administrative oceanography here all at
once? Well, Professor Sverdrup was originally
to essentially head up the kind of oceanographic
component at the Point Loma Laboratory. But he
encountered security problems because of having
his family, not his immediate family, but
relatives in Norway and so on. And it was felt that
he was in a sensitive set of positions.
they would not give him security clearance, and I,
essentially, had to take over what he might have
done. And he returned, and he never really left it,
because this was only a part-time sort of activity
down at Point Loma, but he returned sort of
full-time to Scripps.
Walter Monk, whom we had originally had down at
Point Loma with us, and who could not get security
clearance. Frederick Van Monk took on this study
of the wave problem, and I think it started
originally under the Air Force's support. And out
of that, this whole amazingly rapid development
of understanding of the problems of wave
characteristics, wind wave characteristics,
and methods of predicting wind wave conditions
and swell and surf and so on. And then out of that
activity came the
training program which was set up at Scripps,
which I had no direct contact at all, although I was
living within a few miles of it, which brought in a
number of young officers from the Air Force and the
Navy who were trained in these wave forecasting
techniques. And as we were saying this morning,
later on, a number of these young men returned to
Scripps and finished off their doctoral work. But
that was really one of the, I think, very dramatic
developments during the war. Because prior to the
time that Sverdrup and Munch turned their
attention to this problem, which they had not
really dealt with previously, there was
virtually nothing known about the
characteristics of ocean waves. It was a body of
theory, but very little connection between the
sort of theory and the real conditions. And there
was only a very, very limited literature about
wave conditions and wave behavior.
Did you consciously make an effort at about 45 to go
to Washington or to DC, or did that just happen?
Well, here again, I think that Ravel enters the
story because he had moved from the Navy
Laboratories, Point Loma, to the Bureau of Ships,
and in particular to the, I think it was called the
Sonar Design Section or something of that name,
under a I can't remember his rank now, but Bennett,
and had the imagination to see the role and
importance of ocean information to the Navy. And
yet there was no mechanism by which the Navy could
essentially continue the oceanographic studies
and so on. There are a number of sort of related
threads to the story which are involved in this
thing, and that is that, as I mentioned earlier, at
Woods Hole and at Point Loma, we prepared, for
example, these sonar charts and so on. They were
actually published through the hydrographic
office. And so that during the war, they had set up
in the hydrographic office an oceanographic
unit, I believe it was called at that time. And this
was under the direction of Mary Sears, who was
being commissioned as a wave. They served during
the war as essentially a publications outlet for
some of the material being prepared under these
war research laboratory programs. And they did
some compilation of various kinds of
information. But this was a temporary sort of
situation. And one of the things that Revell and
others were able to accomplished was to have the
Navy Department set up, on a continuing basis, an
oceanographic section in what was then the
Hydrographic Office. And I was, since the offered
the position and it looked extremely interesting
and important to me at that time that to go back and
start what was known when I arrived as the Division
of Oceanography in the Hydrographic Office. Of
course the whole thing was later became the
Oceanographic Office, but it was a division and
Shortly
after I arrived in April of 1946, the
oceanographic unit that had been in existence was
being phased out, and the new division reached a
low ebb of one girl who helped me and myself. I left
about five years later with over 200 people in the
division and operating two sort of what were at
that time very large oceanographic vessels for
the Hydrographic Office. So this was, yes, a
challenging sort of thing. I felt that there were
urgent needs to keep a sort of national program
going, rather than letting things die, as they
might have at the end of the war. And
I think this was turned out to be quite correct.
What sort of people did you look for when you went to
establish this office? Did you already have some
people in mind whom you wished to bring to
Washington? Well, only a few people that I'd known
for one reason or another and seemed desirable and
seemed appropriate for the job. And the People
that really were brought in as to be my principal
assistants were Clifford Barnes, who you'll
probably talk to next week, but he only spent a
relatively short time with us and then returned to
the University of Washington. John Lyman, who you
may have encountered, who had been in the Navy all
during the war as a reserve officer. and had been at
Scripps before that, Thomas Austin, who's now
head of the National Data Center, and another
young man who'd been at the WAVE program at Scripps
during the war, Charles Bates, who's now chief
scientist for the Coast Guard. So those were the
the, in a sense, senior people who came in early in
the game. But what was...
I think interesting looking back that far, which
is just over 30 years ago, that at that time there
was no classification in the civil service for
anybody called an oceanographer. So one of my
first sort of jobs back there was to set up the job
descriptions for oceanographers, get them
approved by the Civil Service Commission, and
then begin to try and recruit some people. And I
very soon found that there weren't very many
people to be recruited. And as any administrator,
I abhor as a job vacancy why we were in the position
of having to hire people with degrees in physics or
chemistry or geology and so on, with essentially
no experience whatsoever in oceanographic
problems. And I soon realized, as I'd learned
during the war, that there was a real need for some
kind of program to train people or educate people
in the field. And so, as I sometimes remark, I
decided to get out of the the hiring business and
get into the manufacturing business, and that's
why the opportunity to come to the University of
Washington looked attractive to me. Not only was
it sort of intellectually attractive, but I
thought there was a very real sort of need here.
Now, there was some graduate programs available
in the early years following the war, but One of the
things that really stimulated me into coming to
the University of Washington was the opportunity
to set up an undergraduate program in
oceanography, which had never been attempted
before. You know, I want to return
I have several questions, though, right here
concerning your activities in D.C. itself rather
than Washington State. Was there much conflict
between these civilian oceanographers and Navy
personnel when you began to establish this
office? Well, I wouldn't say there was any
conflict. We were looked on as a set of screwballs
by the establishment within the Hydrographic
Office. They didn't know quite what we were or who
we were or anything else. And so we were allowed
really a considerable amount of sort of freedom
simply because they had no prior experience in
this area. And this
period, and I can't identify it specifically by
year, but the military budgets were being cut back
very severely in the late 40s, and along with them
the Hydrographic Office was being cut back by
major amounts,
and yet the oceanographic program continued to
grow. This of course was looked on with some sort of
favor and encouragement here, but I think they
realized that there was something to be done here.
Now, the people who are sort of particularly
important in encouraging and supporting the
growth of the oceanographic program were not so
much within the office itself, but in the Office of
the Chief of Naval Operations, people concerned
with anti-submarine warfare and pro-submarine
warfare and so on, the operating forces. And it was
largely through their interest that we got the
support and opportunities we did. What about ONR?
I have to stop and think here again. That got
started when, about 46? 46. It's not really called
Owen Orr then, but Revelle begins to think about
Owen Orr in 46. Yes, it was the Office of, what was it
called? Something Rather Off, Orr? Something and
Invention. Yeah, right, it's a strange title.
Yes, and it must have got established about that
time, and Revelle then moved from the
Bureau of Ships to the newly established, and of
course the establishment of ONR was in a sense a
response to the phasing out of the wartime
research activities under NDRC and the parent
organization, which was OSRD, Office of
Scientific Research and Development, I guess it
was. And so the Navy was, in a sense, trying to find
some mechanism to keep some of their programs
going. We worked very sort of closely together,
although I cannot remember that there were ever
any sort of transfer of funds or anything, as one
might again anticipate in more recent times. But I
actually spent almost a year of it. It must have
been about 1949, 50. I spent the better part of a
year actually in ONR on loan, in a sense, from
the... Hydrographic Office to work on planning
and so forth as related to anti-submarine
problems. And so there was a good sort of, I think,
there was no conflict there as you ran into some
sort of of difficulties that you'd almost
anticipate anywhere. But I had really very good
rapport, I think, with the people in the
Hydrographic Office, the CNO, and ONR, Bureau of
Ships, and so on. So, no, I don't feel there was any
antagonism, certainly there was a difference in
perspectives on a lot of the problems. I went back
to Washington with the idea that we ought to be
doing a lot of work on the Arctic, and this had
seemed to me a good sort of subject in which we knew
very little and that we ought to be doing some work
up there. And here's where we got into
lack of appreciation on the part of the
particularly CNO, who informed me and my boss, the
hydrographer, in no uncertain terms that the Navy
had no plans to operate in the Arctic and therefore
had no reason to want to spend any money trying to
find out about it. So one of the things I was able to
do, in part with assistance from ONR and some
others, was to, in effect, bootleg some, get some
work started in the Arctic.